# Governance of the Decred project subsidy through Politeia

I’ve recently taken an interest in cryptocurrency projects that are attempting
to decentralize various aspects of their governance.
[Decred](https://www.decred.org/) is interesting in this regard because it aims
to decentralize decision-making about both:

* the adoption of consensus changes that require hard forks
* the spending of a project subsidy (10% of the block reward)

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*MVU8Cg-gFoPINPVRhqDTjg.jpeg)

### **Decred Governance Basics**

Decred combines Proof of Work (PoW, 60% of block reward) with Proof of Stake
(PoS: 30% of block reward) to secure the network, with the remaining 10% of the
block reward going into a project subsidy wallet to fund development of the
project.

Stakeholders are key to Decred’s governance. Decred stakeholders purchase
tickets by locking their DCR until those tickets are selected to vote, when one
buys a ticket one indicates how it will vote on any open issues. Tickets are
selected pseudo-randomly, the interval until a ticket is selected follows a
Poisson distribution with mean 28 days. Voters receive a reward when their
ticket votes, if a ticket hasn’t voted after about 4 months it can be revoked
and the DCR returned to its owner. The locking requirement is intended to ensure
that stakeholders vote in the long-term interests of the project.

Decred stakeholders, i.e. those who own active tickets, weighted by the number
of tickets they own, [already vote to accept or reject changes to
consensus](https://docs.decred.org/getting-started/user-guides/agenda-voting/).
This is interesting, but so far has only been used to adopt changes which were
not contentious.

I’m not a software developer, cryptographer or game theoretician. While I
appreciate that control over changes to consensus rules is fundamental to
cryptocurrencies - that ground has been well covered by people who are more
knowledgeable on the subject than me.

### Decred’s project subsidy

Looking at a community's decision-making with regard to deploying resources or
spending money is much more within my wheelhouse. I’m interested in projects
like these specifically, because it’s easier for me to understand a community’s
approach to decision-making and evaluate its effectiveness in the context of
spending money. Deciding how to allocate resources is also important for
projects that aim to be autonomous, because it typically costs money to develop
software.

10% of the Decred block reward goes into a project subsidy account, and the
project aims to administer this budget through a Decentralized Autonomous Entity
(DAE) controlled by stakeholders. [This account currently holds around 460k
DCR](http://explorer.dcrdata.org/address/Dcur2mcGjmENx4DhNqDctW5wJCVyT3Qeqkx)
(or about $35 million), and these funds will be at the disposal of stakeholders
through Politeia.

### **My background with Decred**

I started following a number of projects with development funds and ambitions to
administer these in a decentralized fashion in October 2017. One of these
projects was Decred. Stakeholder voting to decide how the project subsidy would
be spent sounded interesting, but I couldn’t find a lot of detail about how it
would work. I started hanging out on the Decred Slack and
[subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/decred/), looking for more details,
thinking that the details were under wraps and would emerge soon.

Aside from some fundamentals that all the project’s major contributors obviously
agree on, my impression is that a lot of the detail about how this would operate
and what it would do seems to have been worked out on the fly, mostly in public
Slack channels. This impression is based on some misunderstandings I witnessed
and how these were resolved. That’s pretty cool, I like the idea of incremental
steps towards decentralized administration of the project subsidy that I can
follow along with and participate in discussions around.

In recent discussions around the [2018
roadmap](https://blog.decred.org/2018/02/28/2018-Decred-Roadmap/), it was
suggested that producing detailed descriptions and updates on development was a
role that nobody in particular had responsibility for, and that members of the
community were welcome to take it on. Although my plan was to study Politeia in
action, it seems worthwhile to compile my notes about how it will work from a
participant’s perspective now - so that interested parties can have a better
sense of how it will work, any misconceptions (including my own) can be brought
to light, and the community can have more effective discussion on that basis.

The following is my understanding of how Decred will approach decentralizing
governance of the project subsidy. It is based on a couple of Decred blog posts,
some reddit posts, and discussions in the #politeia and #general channels in
Slack (and bridged messaging platforms) over the last four months.

### **Politeia**

The version of [Politeia which launched in
November](https://blog.decred.org/2017/10/25/Politeia/) is the foundation upon
which Decred proposal voting will be built. Politeia has been summarised as “git
plus timestamping”, a post comprising text (with markup) and (png) images can be
submitted and Politeia anchors this to the DCR blockchain so that one can know
with confidence that it was created or edited at a particular time. Politeia
generates censorship tokens for submissions, if a submission is removed its
submitter can demonstrate that they submitted it and that it was censored using
the token.

Politeia launched with a contest to develop other use-cases for the platform
beyond Decred governance, entrants were presented and the winners[ announced in
February
2018](https://btcmanager.com/decreds-politeia-challenge-overview-winners/).

### **Politeia for proposal voting (Pi)**

The latest test version of Politeia for proposal voting can be found at:
[https://test-proposals.decred.org/](https://test-proposals.decred.org/)

I see the abbreviation Pi used for Politeia a lot, I will use that to refer
specifically to “Politeia for proposal voting” and the website that will
facilitate this.

Pi proposals and discussions will be publicly view-able, but there will be a
registration fee (currently set at 0.1 DCR, about $7.50 at today’s prices) to
participate (submit proposals, comment and vote).

There will be a fee to submit proposals to Pi. This fee is intended to
discourage spam, and will be set high enough to achieve this but without
creating a significant barrier to people with genuine proposals to submit. I’m
not sure what this fee will be, I think also 0.1 DCR.

When proposals are submitted to Pi they will have an “unvetted” status and won’t
be immediately publicly visible. A panel of reviewers will vet each proposal to
ensure that it conforms to a set of minimum requirements (to be determined).
When a proposal passes this vetting its status will changed to “vetted” and it
will appear publicly on Pi. When a proposal is rejected it will not appear
publicly on Pi, its submitter can use the censorship token to prove that they
submitted a proposal which was censored.

Pi borrows features from reddit. Up/down voting is applied to proposals, with
up/down votes cast through the Pi web app being used to determine proposals’
visibility (order of display). This up/down voting is also applied to comments
on proposals. However, these up/down votes are not binding, they are not Pi’s
method of decision-making.

Decisions will be made through voting that is bound to active Decred tickets, I
will refer to this as approve/disapprove voting. For approve/disapprove voting,
it is the number of tickets voting that matters rather than individual
users/wallets/accounts — a stakeholder with 1 ticket has 1 vote, a stakeholder
with 100 tickets has 100 votes. This follows the same principle as Decred’s
voting on consensus rules changes (or “hard forks”), decision-making influence
is tied to the amount of Decred an individual is willing to lock up in tickets.
This is intended to align incentives, the act of locking up DCR is designed to
ensure that participants in governance have “skin in the game”, and are
incentivized to vote in the project’s best interest lest their locked DCR
decreases in value.

Approve/disapprove votes must therefore be signed by a wallet with active
tickets to count (and so the system knows how much weight they count for). Pi
proposals will have a window where they are active for voting (this window is I
think set to be one week), during this window stakeholders can use their active
tickets to cast approve/disapprove votes, at the end of the window a decision is
made based on a tally of those votes.

A list of active proposals will be shown in Decrediton (Decred’s GUI wallet) and
stakeholders will be able to vote on these directly from their wallet.
Registration and activity on Pi will not be a requirement to participate in
approve/disapprove voting, and ticket-holders can do this directly through their
wallet (Decrediton or the command-line dcrwallet).

There has however been discussion of how to also bridge approve/disapprove
voting on the Pi web app with wallets that can sign votes. The latest proposal
is to allow “provisional” voting on Pi so that a user can conveniently indicate
their approve/disapprove votes on the platform — then export this as JSON which
can be imported into the wallet to make the actual binding approve/disapprove
votes in a batch.

The exact criteria for approval are to my knowledge yet to be determined, this
will likely consider the net approve/disapprove score and also the total number
of votes cast — such that a proposal can only pass if it receives votes from a
certain proportion of active tickets and a certain proportion of those votes are
to approve the proposal.

The initial release of Pi will not attempt to autonomously decentralize the
administration and payment of successful proposals. In the initial release,
successful proposals can be thought of as instructions to the (human) holders of
the keys to the project subsidy wallet. Direct decentralized control of the
disbursement of funds through Pi is planned for later in the project.

Pi proposals themselves can therefore be quite free-form, they are essentially
free-text (and optionally images). A proposal can describe its own set of
deliverables or milestones, and the manner/timing in which progress is assessed
and payments made. Stakeholders will bear this in mind when they vote, and it
will be up to the holders of the keys to the project subsidy wallet to
administer the payments to successful proposals on this basis.

### **How will Pi be used?**

From discussions in the stakeholder community, it seems that the preference will
be for proposals that are funded in arrears, i.e. a successful proposal must be
followed by progress in line with its deliverables before payments will be made.

It is also likely that Pi will see a number of large ongoing proposals that fund
big chunks of work through existing teams (e.g. the work of Company 0 on core
functionality, the work of the marketing team) without stakeholder
micro-management of the work of those teams. Proposals like these will set
budgets for large chunks of work, leaving it up to the team to work out the
details. This is intended to keep the administration overhead low, and
decision-making about certain aspects high-level, while stakeholders retain the
ultimate control to reduce the funding of or de-fund a team.

External parties who are not currently contractors for Decred may also come with
proposals to fund a certain package of work, with a requested budget and a plan
for how that would be deployed. Discussions have indicated that other more
contentious issues (like whether to pay a fee for an exchange listing, whether
to re-brand) could also be resolved through Pi proposal voting.

While payments will initially be made manually by those who control the keys to
the project subsidy, the intention is to move towards full decentralized control
over this aspect too. So, the way that Pi proposals are structured and tracked
will be monitored, with a view to building out the autonomous administration to
serve common patterns that have been found to work.

From discussions it seems likely that budget requests and payments will be
denominated primarily in a national currency like USD, to avoid some of the
issues that come with budgeting in the more volatile DCR.

*****

The Decred team are taking a pragmatic approach to decentralizing control of the
project subsidy and the project more broadly. This approach involves taking one
step at a time towards decentralized autonomy, seeing what works and what causes
problems and finding incremental advances without the stakes being too high.
Right now the project subsidy is being administered manually (and sparingly),
under the direct control of the project’s leaders. My impression is that they’re
serious about relinquishing that control, that engineering themselves out of
having this control is what makes the project interesting for them

The launch of proposal voting on Politeia will undoubtedly be interesting. This
will launch not as a complete and definitive system but as a set of tools which
the community can use to begin the process of figuring out how decentralized
governance of the project should work. Through submissions, comments and up/down
votes on the Pi website we will hear what the individuals who are invested
enough in the project to pay the registration fee and contribute think. The Pi
web app is similar to a subreddit, which most other projects already use, but
the registration fee will impose a relatively small barrier to entry (0.1 DCR or
about $7.50 at today’s prices) which should diminish the effectiveness of
astroturfing and sybil attacks without preventing people with a genuine interest
in the project from participating.

Through approval voting tied to tickets we will see the will of the Decred
stakeholders expressed, weighted by the quantity of DCR they hold and are
willing to stake in tickets. It is the Decred stakeholders who exercise the
greatest control over the project, and the decisions they make through approval
voting will give a good indication of how the project is likely to develop going
forward.

Excitingly, this whole process will be open and transparent, allowing anyone
with an interest in the governance of cryptocurrency projects to study Decred’s
approach and observe how it plays out. I’ll be watching this with interest and
writing about it, as well as continuing with my analysis of other projects.
